---
cover:
    image: "/irreconcilable/images/statues2.jpg"
    alt: "Banner"
    hidden: false
weight: 1
title: "i. the den of gifts"
date: 2026-02-09
draft: false

---

by James Cody Phelan<br>  
<br>  \
  
A clamor rang through the morning quiet. Gulls sprung from their roosts above drystone homes and squawked in protest, their days ruined. One squabble of birds drifted over to investigate the commotion and spied a human, only just passing through the dying Koumaria shrubs bundled at the northern edge of the village. The human labored, dragging anger behind him. 

Down below, the Goodwoman Sonja knelt before an apricot sapling inspecting the plant for blight. She wiped smeary sweat from her eyes to get a clear look. One of the roots dangled limply but bore no mark of the dreaded rot. As she prepared to set the sapling in the earth, her attention snagged on the noise which had so bothered the seagulls. She left the promising tree, dusted off her dress, and poked her head out around the inlet of her garden wall in curiosity. Other women, stooped women with sun-crinkled faces, quit their sweeping to investigate the noise as well, their husbands and fathers and sons were out at sea, having left well before dawn for the morning catch. Sonja met the gaze of her neighbor across the path. They shared a moment, the two women, each raising a brow in concern before returning their attention up.

Up the cobbles, too distant to make clear, she spotted a figure moving at a sluggish pace. Sonja’s eyes, even once cleared of the hot day’s drippings, had been failing her for some years, and the silhouette above was not known to her. She could, however, judge what he dragged with him.

The anchor was massive, larger than any she had ever seen in a lifetime among fishermen. The man – or adolescent, she now realized – he gripped the broad stock in front of him and snaked backwards over the stones, his bare feet tripping on protruding rock. Gaps in the path threw the anchor momentarily in the air before rising to meet its grating screech. The person in front of the hunk of metal fought for control under the strain.

As he, the anchor, and the gulls drew closer, Sonja covered her ears to drown out the chaos at her doorstep. Only then, fingers plunged into her ear canals, did she recognize the figure. It was the orchard boy, from the farm north of the village. The realization wearied her. Her hands lowered so they could form a tight grasp before her skirt. The cacophony returned. The sun burned hot overhead. Her gaze followed her hands down, and without thinking, she began to rub the creases of her right hand with the thumb of her left, back and forth, her touch feeling the deep crevasses of her worn palm. She brought her gaze up, only to see that the boy and his lonely parade had passed. Out again she peered around the edge of the garden. The boy continued in front of the anchor, sweat sticking his thick black curls to his forehead and nape. 

She made to call out, “You mus…” but her voice tumbled over the bridge of her throat in a rasp. Again, voiced, “You mustn’t!”

If he heard her over the noise, he offered no acknowledgement. His focus wrapped a heavy skein around the anchor held fast in his strained arms. 

“Goodness!

Child!

Stop, please!”

She was sure that her voice, not known to be meek, had reached him, yet the boy did nothing but pause for a single moment, turn around with some difficulty, and load the anchor’s weight above his shoulder blades. The head of the metal shank protruded past his head, forcing him to look only down as he lumbered forward.

***

The rock formation, known locally as the Salt Mistress, jutted out from the beach just east of the village’s dock. Like the figurehead on a massive ship, the Mistress had seemingly grown out from the low cliffs on her journey out to the sea. Shallow puddles dotted the beach on either side of the promontory. Over the course of the year, the puddles and the levees which protected them would allow the sun to steal away their water, leaving only salt. For now, though, the puddles sat half full.

Old-man Palinkos sat on top of the Salt Mistress, a fishing rod in his hands, each missing a finger or two. He would never admit it to his wife, but the Mistress was his second love. Every morning since he had stopped going out on the boats, he carried his self-fashioned rod and stool to the rocks and cast uncaringly into the lapping waves below. He often thought about the sea or the gulls or the wind; today, he thought about the salt holes. They were ugly little pocks, really. The beach flowed so natural as it crumbled from the cliffs above and out into the sea, and the Mistress, with her grace and jagged power, gave the cove character. The holes spoiled her grace. His presence, he considered, was just the same as the puddles. Atop the rocks, he was no better than their blight against the perfection of the beach. 

*Oh well. The sun takes from us all - the puddles, their moisture, and me, my skin and bones. Soon I will dry up and the puddles will die.*

A screech brought him out of his ruminations. Down the rocks and over the ponds, up past the dock and toward the village, children were fluttering, some dancing or cartwheeling in celebration while others ducked between shaded alcoves in frightful curiosity; dogs yipped and yapped in every direction, uncertain of where to point their ire; gulls and village women observed overhead from their windows.  

The young man at the center of the chaos appeared oblivious to the whole affair; his eyes bored down on the path beneath him and saw nothing else. He ambled along in short, controlled, and powerful bursts with his back facing Palinkos and the rock. The fisherman witnesses the entire affair clearly as if watching a play from high up, as like an amphitheater. Only now, the players in the scene acted way up in the rafters, and he, the singular audience member, sat center stage. 

After pausing for a half-dozen heartbeats, the boy began the climb down the stairs. There were one hundred and twenty-seven steps from the last precipice of the village to the foot of the docks. This, Palinkos knew, not from ever counting but just as a matter of fact. He also knew that the stairs had been carved from the cliffs long ago. Half were taller than his knees, others barely steps at all.

“You descend the steps of giants and mice! Which are you?” 

Palinkos shouted at the boy, knowing full well the gibe would not reach his ears. Still, he felt pleased with his wit.
His gleeful smirk quickly faded as he, for the first time catching the truth of the scene, saw the parade and commotion for what they were. The crowd, led by children, carried an air of playful curiosity, but the boy’s face, a face twisted with anguish, betrayed their mirth. Sweat poured down from his forehead in viscous drops and drenched his simple shirt along its length. The anchor could not be dragged down the larger steps, so, Palinkos saw, the poor creature improvised a complicated motion. The boy positioned himself with one foot on two successive steps and drew himself close with bent knees. Summoning strength, he then used locked arms and a tense swivel to lift the hulking metal briefly into the air and down onto the step below. A breath, one, two. Then again, he repeated the process, skipping the steps intended for Palinkos’ mice.  

Atop the Mistress, the aged fisherman – now standing – watched in horror. Each step curdled his stomach. The anchor dwarfed the man-child, and each crashing drop exposed its impossible weight. The visage before him, coming now into further focus, told only of pain.

Up above, the village children no longer danced or shouted; all stood – together with the mothers and sisters – in silence, driven together in a pack. Below, boy cleared the stairs and now dragged the anchor across the final path before the docks. Blood ran down his hands and dried along his arms in the scalding sun. Crossing onto the wooden planks of the docks, the anchor ceased its shrieking and began to dully thud against each board. The relative quiet gave Palinkos his first chance to communicate across the aquatic void.

“My boy, what are you doing?” he shouted, standing up from his stool.

“Why bring this instrument to the sea? It may have the look of a sea-faring tool, but that thing has no business out there!“

He knew he had been heard, but his plea was met with only thudding monotony. 
“You’re a fool to believe her. Look where it got your father.”
At this, the boy finally stopped his relentless charge. He made not the slightest turn of head nor twitch of arm, keeping the anchor motionless in front of him.
Palinkos seized the moment, “What, dear Soilson, do you hope to achieve? The farm is gone, your father too. A watery grave will help no one, least of all you.”
A moment passed as the sea inhaled. 
“A gift,” the boy said, turning to Palinkos with a forced smile, “I wish to give a gift.” With his head again directed down at his grip, he tensed his forearms and continued the slog. 
Palinkos sunk back onto his stool. At the end of the dock, the boy rolled the anchor onto a small dingy and set out to sea. 
***
He kept a strong, even pace over the sea. On any other day the rowing would have been grueling, but today, following his morning labors, Yori welcomed the respite. His earlier theatrics stuck as a fleck of embarrassment to his ribs. The heed he had not paid the old woman, who he knew as a friend of his grandfather, bothered him gravely until he forced himself to re-focus on the task at hand. 

A great expanse of open water lifted behind his back – and increasingly before him – and he wondered whether the dingy had the legs for the journey. The boat had been his uncle’s and, even in its younger years, had never been more than a bundle of loosely affiliated wooden pieces. Now in the light of day he could see the decay and woodworm holes eating at the hull. Yori made certain not to pull the oars toward the sky while rowing for fear of dislocating the oarlocks that tenuously held to the gunwale. 

The warm sea breeze channeled through his tattered shirt. He rowed some time longer, lost in unthought, first southeast and then south, until the sun burnished directly overhead. Away from the reefs and sand banks, the Mother Sea swelled before him. Here, she swaddled him.

With methodical hands, he drew out a thin rope stored beneath his feet and secured one end around the eye of the anchor. Dotingly, he laid the anchor flat against the thwarts so that the metal weight hung parallel to the sea. Yori then turned around and braced himself for the task ahead. He draped his body over the anchor, the surprisingly icy metal rod chasing down his spine from nape to tail bone, planting his feet on the boards below. The pain as he lowered himself down was clear, like kneeling on a stone floor during prayer. He took the remaining rope and began wrapping it around his chest then under the anchor in tight, even circles. After four passes, he sinched down the rope like a nautical corset, stealing expansion from his lungs. The work was slow. Passing the rope from hand to hand under the increasingly taught binding sapped energy from his arms and core. He only felt satisfied once the wrapping covered from his chest down to his upper thigh. The bar, still cold, bisected his back and helped numb the ache of laying in such discomfort. The numbing spread down his limbs and up through his spine, and for a fraction of a moment, he experienced a cool paradise as the sun bled overhead.

Remembering himself, Yori came back to his body. He inhaled a cool jet of sea air, then he pushed off hard with his right foot against the boards, attempting to roll him and the anchor over the gunwale. Despite his effort, the anchor barely lifted. Again, he drew up strength and shoved his might down to kick off, yet the cord around him kept any remaining power from his trunk from aiding him. 

Distant from the moment of calm seconds ago, he let out a visceral growl. Yori lay there for twenty heartbeats, panting like a sodden dog, the day’s physical stresses catching up with him. 

He hooked his fingers through the oarlocks with arms outstretched and began rocking the dingy from side to side. The motion required him to put his weight on one side of the anchor before quickly shifting to the other, forcing his vertebrae to grind back and forth over the rod. Momentum grew, and soon he could see the water again by craning his neck. He, the boat, the oars, and anchor tossed their collective weight in manic sweeps. One of the oarlocks ripped from the wooden gunwale, so he clung to the edge as best he could to continue the swing. Swirling tides and gusts pitched the boat sideways. Just as the dingy would reach its apex –just as he could picture crashing into the water below – it would roll over once more. Metal scraped bone. The oars slid out. Back again to the left, until he and the anchor hung on to gravity’s precipice. He stared at the blue directly below to his left, then the boat took one last furious rock and threw the two companions into the depths. 
***

Light curled at odd trajectories under the water’s surface. Rays hit the surface and wound around one another before shooting off unpredictably. Tiny microbes fell off the tangled light and clustered together as drifting stars. Yori reached out to touch one of the descending starfalls and found it surprisingly heavy. Not cumbersome but similar in heft to a skipping stone. With the starfall in hand, he felt a shock of overwhelming hunger. Its weight and size and smoothness reminded him of a fig fruit, plucked by the hands of his sister and tossed down from the branches above. 

Starving, he plopped the starfall into his mouth.

The gift was salty, brined in the juices of the sea, and delightfully chewy, moreish. His father would love them, he decided, for he cherished all things salty. His mother would ponder how to make one. ‘Equal parts salt and light,’ she would have guessed, ‘But that suppleness will be difficult to recreate.’ He thought to bring them a sample as he shoveled more of the treats into his mouth.   

As they sank alongside the boy and anchor, the starfalls began crashing into one another. Upon impact, they fused into larger globules: First as figs, then oranges, then ballooning melons. The light fought to break free of these growing spheres. Spurts of raw energy flared out like fingers stretching through rolled dough. In his stomach, Yori could feel the weight of the starfalls he’d eaten. They burgeoned for space within him. His innards, though bound by rope, began to expand. He looked around, sinking deep below the surface, as the array of miniature suns quivered ever more violently, both within and without. In his gut, the energy fought to escape. Suddenly, one of the massive balls before him exploded in a flash of harsh light. The sudden release sent a shockwave reverberating through the water. A second shot off, then a third, until the entire sea ignited in a brilliant phantasmagoria. His stomach flipped, and out of his mouth, cascading from recesses wormed within, poured a flood of dense starmatter. Vomit flew to join the blinding display, even as an artifact lingered. 

When the light began to fade – eaten by the sea – he could no longer see the surface above. Color sapped from the water. Goose-pimples speckled his arms. The infinite sea closed in around them as they drifted down.