---
cover:
    image: "/irreconcilable/images/box.jpg"
    alt: "Banner"
    hidden: false
weight: 3
title: "iii. do aliens dream of football"
date: 2026-02-09
draft: false

---

You notice the colors first. Tangerine orange against lapis; vermillion against daisy yellow. The shades enwrap each man and his carapace of beetle-like armor as he enters the field of green. Supervisory figures wears stripes of zebra hide, their greyscale in obvious distinction to abundant polychrome. At either edge of the field, beyond the painted hectares, stand neon-yellow metal tongs bifurcated to the sky, as the sky rests bluer than the day it was born. The colors twist and fold, over and behind as men jockey across the constructed terrain. There they smash, sprinting, into their opposite partner, their colors overlaid in a competition of visual noise you cannot ignore. It is fabulous.  

My minder during my visit, a honey-tongued American named Chris (like their god), called the contest a "game", though I see little that could be considered a game in the exercise. From my vantage, far above the buzzing spectators, conspicuously secluded in a well-adorned room, I struggled to ascertain any elements of “play” commonly associated with how the Americans define the word “game”. The participants certainly do not appear to be having much fun. They are gargantuan, the men, with wiry beards and painted faces, standing a head taller and weighing two or three times my average human size. Atop their massive frames, they wear a shell of molded plastic that accentuates their torsos and shoulders. Below the waist, they don tights that bulge with padding tucked into pockets around the hips, thighs, and knees. A sleek, rotund helmet completes the armor package, almost growing out from the plastic shell, up over the back of the head, closing in over the cheeks and forehead but leaving room for vision and natural breath behind a stringy cage. 

Wearing these ensembles, the men throw themselves together. They collide at regular intervals, battling for territory, hunting an oblong ball. Violence is essential to this end. The men grapple and toss a partner opposite them in jabs of activity, then just as quickly, rest next to one another, seemingly amicable to the enemies around them. Then again, they strike. They tuck and dive, whirl before their partner in what might be mistaken for a choreographed performance. The men do, truly, fight (of this I have been assured), but the predictable cadence of action, its frequent stops and starts, belies authenticity. I detect a degree of verisimilitude, which I suspect may be purposeful. The Americans desire an aesthetic of combat without undercutting the game’s value as entertainment. It would be uncouth for them to enjoy bloodshed. But dressed in theatrical finery, the combat is elevated beyond base savagery, into the realm of culture. It helps that each side of the game brings a considerable entourage to the competition, many of whom, decked to the hilt in armor, stand idly on the edge of the field for the full duration of the game. Their presence adds to the verisimilitude; this conflict is not full-out warfare. When I raised this point with Chris, the man looked perplexed. “Those men would kill to win,” he stated flatly. Then, he turned me around to the extravagant buffet behind us and suggested I try a hot dog, a delicacy specific to these to these events.  

Down below, commanding officers direct different platoons into and out of the fray at whim. These officers establish order within their kin groups with remarkable control; the men move about the field, expertly, as they are commanded. They obey resolutely, as mere ritual. To capture the oblong ball, the combatants complete their orders (a minder named this activity as "execution"; to execute) with explosive physicality. Limbs contort as bodies fall into a heap during each period of execution. Not irregularly, the competition pauses as a man writhes on the field, ankle twisted, hand broken, head concussed. The kin groups idle on the edges of the field near their commanders as specialty medical workers tend to their fallen comrade. These workers belong to each kin group as well, wearing their colors, functioning as battle medics. For a heartbeat or a hundred, they diagnose the impaired man. If he rises, the observers let out a wild roar. If he does not, a small vehicle drives onto the field to spirit him away, and still the observers applaud. The competition resumes nevertheless, one man down, a martyr to the cause.  

Capturing the scale of these rituals resists description. As I have mentioned, a great many warriors and commanders, medics and supervisors play primary roles in the display. But there are also an untold number of ancillary practitioners that make the game possible. Video and audio technicians, landscapers, dancers, logisticians, seamstresses, craftsmen, priests, hot-doggers, oblong ball holders, and participant-observers play contributory roles. The in-field observers are particularly noteworthy. These citizens independently drive their vehicles to the giant ovular competition structure, whereout they leave the vehicles in a meticulous cellular arrangement as if defending the central structure, the field, from attack. Once inside the structure, above the field, dressed as representatives of their kin group, these observers whip up a maelstrom of noise to encourage their soldiers and confuse the enemy. When discussing topics other than that of the game, the Americans I have met claim that no central organizing principle guides their people, yet I find this banal (in their eyes) organization deeply compelling. They operate as a single constituent force to spur their young men to victory.  

The game periodically sputters to a complete stop. These breaks are not a function of the competition per say, but they serve those who observe the game from digital video feeds. During these breaks, the video feed instead broadcasts micro-narratives of light entertainment to briefly relieve the observer from the decadent violence on display. Some minority of the narratives tie into previous iterations of the competition between different color-clad kin groups. Most, though, are unrelated. Each presents a scene between Americans, often in their homes or their vehicles, followed by a thin woman who speaks directly to the camera. Like a troubled dream, these instantiations flash rapidly across the screen in vivid color, lacking an identifiable theme to connect them: well-groomed men hold glasses of phosphorescent liquids with bug-eyed smiles; athletic youths trot through sunny, hilly environments as nutritional facts float about the screen as pulsing text; chunks of grit-covered chicken roll over themselves and into containers of viscous fluorescent goo; percentage figures spin up, overlaid on American maps in fulgent pink or blood red.  

As an experience, these micro-narratives are heartwarming, visceral, captivating, yet ultimately beguiling. I suspect they require significant acculturation to fully grasp the web of internal logic to which they allude. And as like the combat game, these interludes must be the result of incalculable human effort. They are lavish, beautiful little things, whatever they are.  

The presentation of narratives is not limited to these break periods. Throughout the video feed of the competition, two older men in layers of luxuriant clothing relay a stream of spoken narratives in real time. The push and pull of the field combat takes priority, but these older men use the ample pauses in the fighting to clue the observer into secondary storylines. The video feed will zoom in dreadfully close to a concerned-looking woman standing in the cold above the game field as the two men discuss her relationship to one of the armored combatants below. This one is a mother. This one a partner. She has instilled "leadership" into the man, "integrity". Photos from the warrior's childhood fizzle onto the feed as the men of luxury attest to the sacrifices he has made to his kin group, how willingly he martyrs himself for his brethren. The stories are wonderful renditions.   

Other men are more defiant, creating acute drama on the battlefield. They baldly argue with the supervisors, tossing their armored helmets to the ground in abject rage, jousting with their enemies using exaggerated gestures, pleading to their commanders for justice. Emotions rise throughout the game as narratives reach their apogee, culminating in a period of heightened fury. Men scream, bodies crumple, victory arrives; the game is over.  

My understanding of the American war game is no doubt incomplete. This small survey only scratches the surface. Chris and my other minders throughout the visit were not forthcoming in how the masses perceive these games.Their customs around combat and entertainment are superbly complex; buried under the savagery and inanity, this game serves a significant cultural role. I begin to grasp how intricately they have woven a fabric of meaning into this ritualized game. The daring, the skill, the presentation of the practice are remarkable. Every member of society, it would appear, devotes themselves to the summary offering of their young men into a collective phantasmagoria that you cannot help but appreciate. Like a sheet covering a vulgar statue, the Americans have loosely hidden their darkest impulses behind a curtain of decorative narrative and then claimed the product as their own defining art, a stowed cache for surreptitious masculine exploration into pageantry and meaning-making.  

Clearly, more research must also be done into the interrelational aspects of their combat simulation. The bonds between the men, at all levels within the hierarchy, deserve special attention in future surveys. And I have only witnessed the most nationalistic engagements; my minder informs me that younger men, some still pre-adolescent, engage in similar skirmishes around the country. They dream of fighting in the Pop-Tart Bowl, he tells me, to defend their honor in a worthy venue.  He promises an unmatched display of color. I suspect my own dreams will be crowded with them for many nights to come.

